away we go this is ron shorn taping tom barnes at the
university of california berkeley on june 8 1993
uh for the record tom what's your name full name
thomas grady barnes iii and where and when were you
born i was born in columbus ohio on august 17 1944.
okay um when did you first get interested in
astronomy uh really during my freshman week when i
was at the university of rochester i went there as a
chemistry major and uh and decided that i ought to
be sure of that so i sat down with the catalog read
all the way through the catalog of majors and said
astrophysics sounds right i decided i had been
more interested in astrophysics in astronomy
through my growing up years than chemistry so i
switched majors when did you get your bachelor's
degree 1966 from Rochester. And then where'd you
go to grad school? University of Toronto. Why? I
wanted to get, I wanted to do my work with the
Invariable Stars and Don Ferney was, and still is,
at the University of Toronto and he had done some
really nice work on Cepheids, so I picked Toronto.
Okay, and when you got there, of course, you took
classes and everything, but what did you do your
thesis on and under who? I did a master's thesis on
secret galaxy variability with Don Ferny, and
then I did my Ph.D. thesis also with Ferny on
statistical parallaxes of MIRA variables to get
the absolute magnitudes. Okay, then you get your
Ph.D., and it's time to get a real job. Where did you
go? I went to McDonald Observatory as a W.J.
McDonald Fellow in the fall of 1970. How did that
start? Did you see a notice on the bulletin board or
something like that? In 1970, when I started
making applications, the job market was really
tight. I mean, it got even tighter later, but it was
pretty tight. And so I applied for darn near
everything I could find. I honestly don't
remember where I saw the notice on it. And I don't
remember that I paid much attention to it as an
application other than I sent it in, as I did a whole
lot of other ones. And then I got a call from Harlan
Smith offering it to me in the spring of 70. And I had
a couple of other things pending at that time that
hadn't been resolved. One, for example, at the
University of Western Ontario. that after
talking with various faculty members, I decided
that I would drop out of the other ones and take the
MacDonald fellowship. OK, so your first contact
with Harlan was over the telephone. But what was
your first trip to Texas like? Actually, I met
Harlan before I went to Texas. I met him at the IAU in
Grenoble in September. August, September,
whenever it was, in 1970. And I remember thinking
when I met him that this is a character. Because
every word he said about Texas was, it's the best in
the world. I remember distinctly him telling me
about the accountant at Texas, keeping the books,
Bill Geist, and how he was the best accountant in
the world. And I thought, this is really
remarkable that everything there is the best in
the world. Because it wasn't quite the way I'd
heard it from people before I went there, that
there was some concern about, well, it was kind of a
new department, a struggling department. But
they had some big telescopes and a lot of access to
those telescopes, which is why I went. So I moved
there in October 1970.
The department and the observatory were still
housed in Painter Hall, the old physics building.
Right within close range of the Texas Tower.
That's right. And in fact, this was not long after
the Texas Tower incident. And that actually
didn't give me any pause. I didn't consider that as
a negative for going to Texas. It was purely an
astronomical decision.
When you got there, how? Roughly, how big was the
department? I mean, how many staff and how many
people at McDonald and the department? It's hard
for me to remember because it was almost 23 years
ago. But I suppose there were probably six or eight
faculty, I guess, maybe 10. I don't remember how
many grad students there were. The conditions in
Painter were very crowded. We were packed into
that particular building, the floors we occupied
on that building, right up into the attic. So it was
pretty crowded conditions, but it didn't seem to
bother people, by and large. In fact, it was kind of
nice in some ways because we interacted more
strongly. Than when you're on three separate
floors. That's right. What did you do when you
first went there? Well, I went as a postdoc, and so I
got an office with Bill Hubbard and... And Bruce,
God, all of a sudden, I can't remember his last
name. Josephson Junction Fellow. And I occupied
the desk that Steve Little had before he left. He
was a previous postdoc. So I started doing the
program that I had planned to do, which was 4N
hypersensitized plates of globular clusters to
do VRI photometry of mirrors.
okay so you're using ammoniated foreign plates
that didn't last very long because uh i discovered
pretty quickly even with the 82 inch telescope
that i wasn't going to be able to get what i wanted
out of the plates and so i looked around for
something else to do during the the two postdoc
years and i discovered that david lambert was
working with reinhardt beer of Jet Propulsion Lab
with a Fourier transform spectrometer on the 2.7
meter, which at that time was still third largest
telescope in the world. And this Fourier
transform spectrometer was state of the art at
that time. It stayed that way for three or four
years. And it was fascinating. It was highly
mathematical. They needed somebody with some
observational experience involved. And so I kind
of fell in with that group. began working FTS stuff
for six or eight months. And then David offered to
move me on to one of his grants. So I dropped off the
fellowship. And I stayed with Fourier Transforms
Spectrometry for about six years.
One of the reasons I'm asking you is that you're at a
place, and you're the assistant director now, I
guess, at McDonald's, that is very heavily
involved in planetary work, one of the few places
it is, but you're not really a planetary
astronomer, so you've got a different point of
view. I mean, you know, you're not going to lose
your grant if you tell the truth, all right? When
you came to UT originally, What would you say was
the status of planetary astronomy at that time?
Was it an integral part of the department, or was it
a big deal, or did people just suffer it to be?
I think it was pretty clearly an integral part of
the department from my perspective. In fact, a lot
of the time I spent observing with that FTS
instrument was on planets, was on Jupiter,
because that was what Reinhardt Beer was
interested in doing. We also did long period
variables and some other things which were more of
interest to me and to David Lambert. But we got
tremendously great amounts of observing time on a
huge telescope, mostly because, I'm pretty sure,
because of the planetary connection of that
program. In fact, I think my one planetary
publication is I'm last author of about five or six
on the first detection of deuterium off the Earth.
which was in deuterated methane in Jupiter from
that instrument. There was a lot of planetary
astronomy going on on the 107-inch or the
2.7-meter. I mean, Ed Barker was there doing it.
There were a number of other people involved. Bill
Hubbard was there with planetary interiors work.
To me, it seemed like it was clearly an integral
part of the program. One thing that I think is a
mistake in Big and Bright, the history of
McDonald's, is that no one who was not a faculty
member at UT was ever mentioned. So that leaves out
Heist-Binrad, it leaves out Tobio, and it leaves
me. And we all, between us, got a substantial
amount of telescope time. Was there ever any, and
of course, that was because NASA said, you know,
you've got to use, we give you the money, you've got
to do it. Was there any... jealousy, rage among UT
faculty members about us outsiders using the
telescope? I don't remember any from then. I
remember a lot of that later, but I don't remember
any from then. Now that may be because I was so
intent as a new postdoc and learning this system
and getting established myself that I wasn't
paying attention to it. I also wasn't connected in
to the faculty and those sorts of discussions to
the extent that I am today. So I may have just missed
it, but I don't recall there being any anti-solar
system stuff at that time in the early 70s. Were
planetary astronomers looked down on by real,
quote, unquote, astronomers? I mean, this is like
a taranto in places like that that didn't have any
planetary problem. Were you aware of anything
like that? No, I wasn't.
I never got that sense at Toronto or at Rochester,
although at neither place were there any
planetary astronomers. And so the topic most
likely didn't come up very much. Do you think
planetary astronomy is real astronomy? Sure.
Sure, I sure do. I think it's exciting stuff. Now,
as I recall, NASA for many years had this block
grant for planetary astronomy that they gave to
McDonald. And then in, what, 88 or 87 or something,
it was switched to individuals or something like
that? That's right. I
became aware of this later on when I got involved in
administrative matters. But NASA provided a
facilities grant, or a block grant as it was
called, to McDonald in exchange for access to the
McDonald facilities, principally the 107-inch.
by planetary astronomers throughout the US. They
had to compete for the telescope time, which in the
early years meant that Harlan had to agree to give
it to you. Later, there got to be a tack and a real
competition that was involved. I was the last
person in the world, and I guess because Harlan
suggested I do it, to write my letters asking for
telescope time in pen and ink on paper. He got a kick
out of that. But I mean, no kidding. I would really
write them on pen and ink and paper. And I still got
some Xerox copies of that stuff. And I guess he was
the last observatory. I mean, he was the last
old-time observatory director that made the
decisions without an observing committee or
anything like that. Is that true? That's right.
During most of the 70s. Now, I'm not sure what year
it changed, but it was right around 1978. It may
have been a year or two earlier or a year or two,
certainly not more than a year or so later. that
prior to that time harlan kept a huge poster board
of uh of graph paper basically on in his office and
he had each telescope and he had uh the calendar on
the x-axis and each telescope was listed on the
y-axis and he would write in in pencil the
observing programs and since and he wrote him in on
pencil because he would change them right up to the
day of the run there were times when uh when my
observing runs were changed at the last minute for
a variety of reasons, none of which seemed to me
good at the time, but I'm sure they were good in his
eyes. That went on until, as I say, the late 70s when
the scheduling was turned over to David Evans, and
then maybe pretty quickly Rob Robinson began
helping him with it, and they did it in a similar way
in the sense that they had golf tees and pegboard,
and they reproduced Harlan's graph paper system
in a different mechanism. But it was still the same
thing. You submitted your proposals. They sort of
read them and decided who got telescope time and
put the pegboard up accordingly. And then it was in
the early to mid-'80s, we went over to an actual
tack. Telescope Allocation Committee, which
reviewed the proposals, made decisions, and
those decisions were honored by Harlan and now by
the current director, Frank Bash. Honest Engine
Scouts Honor is committee allocation of
telescope time better than beneficent despot.
I've thought a lot about that because I've seen
both of them at Texas. And my conclusion is that
from the point of view of the science that gets
done, I don't think it makes a whit worth of
difference. From the point of view of the feelings
of the people proposing for time and getting the
time, it makes a tremendous difference. Because
when there's a group of colleagues who evaluate
one's proposal, come to their best decision, and
then render that judgment, there is more
acceptance than when a single individual says
I've made the decision based on my best reading of
the circumstances. So I don't think it makes any
difference in the science that gets done. I don't
think it made any difference when it went from
Harlan to David Evans to the TAC in who got
telescope time. I haven't done the statistics to
prove it, but I don't believe there was any
difference. But there was a tremendous
improvement in the acceptance of the telescope
schedule by the people listed on it. Now,
currently, you're the assistant director at
McDonald's, and Frank is on vacation. So I'll hit
you, because usually it's like the co-pilot
always lands the plane. The assistant director
does all the work. What's the status of planetary
astronomy at UT and Texas today? I think it's as
healthy as it was at any time in the history of
Texas. There's obviously the difference that
there is not someone with an intense interest in
planetary astronomy in the directorship
position. That changed when Harlan retired as
director and Frank came in. Frank's a radio
astronomer interested in galaxies, in galactic
structure. And he's not hostile to planetary
astronomy, but it's not of intense interest to him
such as it was for Harlan. So that changed. The
quality of the research hasn't changed at all.
We've got both the Cochrans are still there. Larry
Trafton's there. Ed Barker's there. There are a
couple of postdocs that have come and gone working
in that area. Artie Hotzis is there now working
with Bill Cochran. The emphasis of the program has
changed somewhat as the years go by, but that's
normal in any research program. So I think the
quality of the program now is as good as it's ever
been. The amount of telescope time granted to
planetary astronomy in this competitive TAC
environment has stayed high. It consistently
exceeds the amount of time that's been funded by
NASA. We still get quite a few outside observers
coming in. There's Drew Potter from JSC. There's
Alan Stern from Southwest Research Institute and
others who come in to do make use of the McDonald
facilities. So I think it's as healthy as it's ever
been. Here's something that goes for astronomy in
general as well as planetary astronomy. Times are
getting tough, folks. What do you see in the
future? And I think planetary astronomy will
just, because we both agree it's part of
astronomy, so it's going to rise and fall with the
tide. What do you think's in the future for the next
couple of years, the next couple of decades? With
respect to planetary astronomy at McDonald?
Astronomy in general and planetary astronomy at
McDonald. I think for McDonald, things are really
looking up. McDonald over all fields. Because on
April 1st, the Regents approved the
spectroscopic survey telescope, which is the
primary will have a hexagonal shape, 91 hexagonal
segments put together to make a hex primary, which
will be 10 meters by 11 meters. So it'll be a huge
telescope to go at McDonald. Assuming that we can
get all our partners to sign the legal agreements
and that the bids for construction come back
within budget, we will have that in full operation
by sometime in 1997. And you're going to put it on
flat top? It'll be on flat top. Which is now called
Mount? Mount Fulks. Right. But it's flat top to us
old-timers, right? Right. So I see the prospects
from McDonald being outstanding. And the
spectroscopic survey telescope, and we
dedicated the spectroscopy for... minute field
of view, so it's not appropriate for large-scale
imaging, small imaging, okay. I see planetary
astronomy having a very, very big role to play in
that. One question that I have on my list here is how
well do you think astronomers in general and
planetary astronomers in particular have sold
their field And it's particularly appropriate to
ask you, because I think McDonald has done a
tremendous job compared to, say, Mount Wilson and
Palomar, who generally have a the public be damned
attitude, I think it's fair to say. I mean, you're
obviously doing a lot with the general public. And
as you know, Susan Shorn is the assistant editor
for Stardate. That was Harlan's idea to do it. And
do you think that has worked out well to really get
the public involved? Oh, yeah. I mean, it makes a
tremendous difference in how we are treated
within the state of Texas by the legislature and
the university. Frank has said to me that he has sat
in meetings with prominent members of the
legislature, or lunches with prominent members
of the legislature, who, and friends of the
observatory who are discussing the role of
McDonald with these people, who have said that
their connection to McDonald is through
Stardate, through the magazine, through the
radio program, that they take great pride in
driving through Washington DC and hearing on the
radio Stardate come on and reference the
University of Texas at Austin. So our public
outreach program is very effective for us in
maintaining a presence with the political
structure in the state of Texas. But that is a
reason for doing it. It's not the primary reason
for doing it in my mind, nor was it in Harlan's, nor
is it in Frank's. That's a spinoff from you do it
because the people who have paid the bill for all of
our research have a right to hear the results from
that research in a way they can understand. And you
have a huge number of other things going on with the
public, you know, little observing sessions down
at the visitor center and the visitor center. Have
you ever thought about painting the shutters
yellow and putting up a McDonald's on the
mountain? Because everyone always expects...
McDonald's Golden Arches. I know that the public
oftentimes get confused between McDonald's, the
restaurant chain, and McDonald's Observatory,
but no, we haven't actually thought about putting
Yellow Arches out there. Maybe if the funding
situation gets bad enough, we can approach them.
Have you ever approached McDonald's? No, not to my
knowledge. Because, I mean, I don't know how many
times I've been on the mountain, people say, you
know, where do we get the hamburgers? And the
second question is, where's the gasoline
station? Right. And where's the restroom?
But that is in marked contrast to a number of other
observatories that we could name, that probably
because they had private funding sources, and I'm
talking about Molson and Belmar, had only
discussed for the general public. There's two
things that underlie that, I think. One of them is
that in the will from W.J. McDonald, in which he
gave the bequest to the university to erect and
equip, if I can remember the quote, it's something
like, to erect and equip an observatory for the
study and the promotion of the study of the science
of astronomy. And that promotion of the study of
the science of astronomy in his will has been used
as the justification for a strong public outreach
program. But I think that reason is more of a
post-hope justification rather than something
that started it. It really started and was
maintained and grew because Harlan Smith
believed in it. He was absolutely dedicated to a
strong public outreach program. One of the key
things he wanted to accomplish and he did
accomplish. personal opinion why do you think
that kind of attitude is so rare among astronomers
especially since now basically we're all
supported by public money in one way or another um
you know i think at the root the root reason for it in
my mind is that is that most researchers are not
very facile in dealing with other people They're
outstanding in dealing with the technicalities
of a science, in dealing with the mathematics,
with the instrumentation, with the observing
programs, with the observing plans, with the
getting of the money, the writing of the grants,
the writing of the papers. But in everyday normal
social environments, I think an awful lot of
high-tech researchers, like astronomers, are
not very facile. and that they're uncomfortable
with it. And so there's a tendency to focus in on the
nitty gritty of the research and stay away from,
and therefore later to put down, the part of
research where it's communicating at a very
elementary level the fundamentals of what we've
discovered. And unless you're really good at
communicating with the public, such as Harlan
was, or to use the current example, Carl Sagan,
unless you're really good at that, It's hard to do.
And if it's hard to do, people tend to stay away from
it. If they stay away from it, then they tend to
think, well, that's not very important because
I'm not in it. It's not very important. And it tends
to be downrated.
All right. Now it's time for funny stories. All
right. You got any funny Harlan Smith stories?
I mean, for example, in Big and Bright, they never
mentioned the spectrum of the Swiss Army knife,
which was probably before your time. That was
before my time. I've heard that many times, never
directly from Harlan, so I can neither confirm nor
deny it. What was the story? Well, the story was
that, in fact, I did hear that from Harlan one time.
I did hear that from him one time. He mentioned it to
me once with respect to, I can't remember with what
respect, but in any event, The story was that he was
observing on the 82-inch telescope at Coudet and
that the iron arc spectrum, which was produced by
two electrodes close to each other and a high
electrical curve flowing between the two
electrodes. Thomas Edison's arrangement.
Right. So it just gave you a big, bright arc. That
the arc was weak and that Harlan said, well, we need
to adjust the arc to make it brighter on the plates
and so he pulled out his handy swiss army knife and
inserted it between the electrodes to make the
adjustment with the power on and it is said that in
this story i don't know if it's true or not that it
vaporized the blade of the knife which is entirely
plausible to me. A lot of iron lines and chromium
and everything, and you can also see molecular
bands from the handle of the Swiss Army knife.
Because the shutter was open, wasn't it, on the
plate? I don't know that. Supposedly there is a
spectrum that exists. Well, I've heard that. I
don't know whether that's true. It's also told
that Harlan went out and threw the knife down the
mountainside. Now, that does not sound like
Harlan. I don't believe that happened. It doesn't
sound like Harlan. I don't think he would do that.
But whether there's a plate that shows these, I
don't know. Any other stories? Well, Harlan, he
had a tendency to focus in his mind on what he was
doing to the exclusion of other things going on
around him. And we spent quite a few nights
observing on a project to attempt to measure
whether or not there was a time cosmologically
time variability in Planck's constant. This was
in the early 70s. And
we did a lot of cast screen observing on the 107 at
that time together.
There were several nights when we would have the
platform up off the floor, raised up to get access
to the cast instrument. And Harlan would say, I'm
going to check the weather. meant going outside on
the catwalk and walking around the dome and he
would just charge for the door and walk right off
the platform now at no time was the platform more
than maybe two feet off the floor on any of these
occasions but it would happen night after night he
wouldn't he would be so focused on what he was doing
that he wouldn't pay any attention to his
surroundings. And he would fall off and skid along
on the floor and look back and say, I must remember
not to do that. And then he'd do it again. Do you
think Harlan could have done even more had he done a
little less?
I think that's a very good question. It
goes to the heart of what Harlan was like in his
research and his directing, which is that He
attempted to move on all possible fronts
simultaneously. And it worked like a champ when
there was lots of money. Because he would fund
nearly everything. He never met an idea he didn't
like. And that meant we had an incredible number of
things going on simultaneously. And that was
great when there was money to support them.
Because some would plan to pan out, some would not.
And if they didn't pan out, he'd let them go with
some exceptions. But when the mid-80s hit, and
suddenly money began to get tight when the second
oil crunch hit, and literally the depression hit
in Texas. And the 300-inch telescope got
eliminated.
We entered an environment in which money was ever
tighter. And that mode of operation of expanding
on all fronts, funding everything possible, was
simply incompatible with the physical
situation. And it got more and more frustrating
for Harlan as he attempted to do this and could not.
And I think that was one of the key reasons why he
chose to retire from the directorship in 1989.
That he had, McDonald Observatory had entered an
era in which it wasn't fun for him to be director
anymore. When we had lots of money, I think if he had
focused it on fewer efforts, we would have made a
lot more progress in those efforts, but there may
have been some other things that we accomplished
that never would have got started. It's a
different style, the two different styles. It
wouldn't be Harlan if he was different. It
wouldn't have been Harlan. He was not focused like
that on specific research areas. He had a
tremendously broad interest in them. I got a lot of
comments the other week at Austin about the fact
that Harlan was loyal and maybe sometimes too
loyal, and we're talking here like image tube and
everything like that. Yes. Which I guess is the
greatest of his reign. Yes. Did they ever get
anything out of that? They brought the
electronographic image tube was brought to the
point where it actually obtained astronomical
data that were never used. To the best of my
knowledge, they were never used because there
were no astronomers tied into the particular
program. That is that that development was funded
by Harlan and conducted by Paul Gribbeval with
almost no astronomical expertise attached to it.
There were no astronomers demanding that this get
operational so I can use it for my research. There
weren't any. And so when it became operational,
there weren't any to use it. And it became
operational almost at the same time that CCDs came
in. There was a period of a few years where the
camera could have been used for astronomical
uses, but it was too late. There were no
astronomers involved. By the time any
astronomers could have got involved, CCDs had
beat it.
Do you think you, and I talked to Greg Shields, and
I'll let you know, maybe I did tell you the other
night, But we were talking in the library last
week, and we both felt that actually in both of us,
there was only one time in the 30-some years that
I've known Harlan, and almost as long for Greg,
that we ever got to know the real Harlan. And when
you met him, he was open and all that, but do you
think there was still a little curtain or
something like that? Oh, yeah, I think that, I
mean, I worked really closely with Harlan for 11
years. 11 years I had the shared secretary in the
office between us. And I saw him every day. And I
felt that there was always a distance between us,
almost always. Now, there were times when that
would break down. And that's not to say, it's not
because he was a formal guy. It's just, as you say,
there was this veil, this curtain that the inner
workings of Harlan Smith were not always visible.
That it was very hard to know him as just another
human being. He was very closed in that respect. He
was intensely loyal, as you say. He was generous.
But I never really felt that I knew the real Harlan.
Except occasionally I would see it. And one time I
mentioned to you the other night that what was very
obvious I was seeing the real Harlan was when he
called Frank Bash and me into his office, into
Frank's office. This was after Harlan had quit as
director. And told the two of us that he had been
diagnosed with cancer, that it was going to be
really touch and go as to whether he could be cured
from this. uh and he was clearly very emotional
about it and frank asked him a question that had to
do with well to concentrate on winning this battle
are you you told chairman are you planning to lead
the faculty and not teach in the fall because he was
scheduled to teach and harlan said uh he said no
that he was he was going to tell the chairman but he
was going to teach in the fall he was going to stay on
the faculty he was going to continue his
appointment and not take retirement because The
only security Joan had was his pitching. And as he
said that, he literally teared up. And I have never
seen Harlan do that. I've never seen him do that
before. And this was a real person coming through
that he cared deeply that Joan have whatever
security he could leave her if he didn't make it
through this illness. There were other times when
he He was generous and I could see a real human being
there. I had a bruising battle with David Evans one
time over the telescope schedule in which I
overstepped my bounds somewhat in a way that was
inappropriate and irritated David. David was
right. He had a very strong right to be irritated
with me. And so we ended up having a public meeting
in which we disagreed strongly with each other, in
which a decision needed to be taken as to which of us
was going to win. And I was already Harlan's, at
that time I was assistant director, and at the end
of the meeting, Harlan chose David's position.
And when I got back to my office after that, I had a
small scrap of paper, which had obviously just
been torn off of some other larger piece of paper,
onto which was affixed a Band-Aid. And next to the
Band-Aid, Harland had written, one Band-Aid for
one bruised ego, H. It was a nice touch. It took an
awful lot of the sting out of him siding with David.
He was right to do so, but it was a nice touch. It was
the kind of thing that Harlan would do most
unexpectedly. Do you think that Harlan's
gung-ho, let's go get him attitude started to fall
on the authorities in the last few years, the
authorities of the University of Texas? I've
heard that. Yeah, I think it did. I don't think they
were... I think they respected Harlan's power,
but I don't think they really liked him. I'll give
you an example. When we were working to get the
300-inch telescope project approved—no,
I'm sorry. Let me back up. Let me give you a
different example.
The Space Telescope Science Institute was up for
grabs. Where was it going to go? And Harlan wanted
it to go in Austin. And so we were trying hard to get
it. And he was... At that moment, we were changing
presidents at UT Austin. From who to who? We were
going from Lorene Rogers to Peter Kwan. And...
Jerry Falcon, who's now the provost and executive
vice president of the university, and has been for
many years, he was executive assistant to Lorene
Rogers. I don't know his exact title, but he was her
right-hand man in her office. He wasn't vice
president of something or other. So we were
working through him, and we were trying hard to get
the university to put in a proposal for SDSCI. And
the
We went to Jerry and said, can we do this? And Jerry
said, he said, Harlan, I can't get this done. He
said, I'm between two presidents here who
can't deal with this. Okay, well, after the
presidency changed, we went to Peter Flon. And We
met him in the basement office of the geology
building, I believe, and he was in this little
bitty cubicle because he hadn't quite become
president yet. Harlan and I went to him and spoke to
him about this project.
Peter Flan had been at UT Austin when Harlan was
building the 107-inch, and he knew Harlan. He'd
been president after that. He'd been president at
UT San Antonio. And so Flora looked him in the eye
and said, Harlan, I know the way you operate, I know
the way you work, and I need you to tell me the truth
on this. Have you already gone around me to the UT
system on this project? And Harlan said,
absolutely not. I would not do that. I've got to
work with you through channels. And I sat there
dumbfounded because I had personally delivered
the materials to Executive Vice Chancellor Jim
Duncan on this matter down at UT System and had
Duncan look me in the eye and said, you realize this
is out of channels? And I said, yes, sir, I know
that. My instructions are to give you this stuff.
The UT administration knew how he worked. They
respected his power, but I don't think they liked
him. And so Harlan really had a vicious streak. He
could double deal when it was necessary. That's
right. Not vicious. Vicious is not right. It's the
right word. It's more that he had a very strong...
belief in his rightness, in that he was right, and
that to some extent, he'd never have said it this
way, but to some extent the ends justified the
means. It was classic in faculty meetings when I
was on the faculty. It was absolutely classic the
way he would handle the faculty, in that he had a
proposal He would bring it to the faculty to
discuss, as was right and proper. There would be a
majority opposed to him. And so he would say, it's
clear we have not reached consensus on this yet, so
let's continue the discussion later. And he would
literally continue the discussion until he had a
majority. He would never let it not happen. It's
just he knew he was right. I mean, he had no question
but that he was right. And I'm going to change the
subject. One of the things I put in this proposal
that NASA bought was that any good observatory, if
they're lucky, has somebody, and in the case of
McDonald's, it's Bob Dahl, whose equipment we
have all used. And yet, those kind of guys don't get
to write scientific papers. And there's a guy,
John Geary, for example, at Center for
Astrophysics, who's the Bob Dahl of the Center for
Astrophysics. Without them, we'd all be dead
meat. All right. Now, Bob Tall is still alive and
well and kicking, but how do you handle those
people? How do you keep them on the payroll? I mean,
they're necessary, but they don't meet, I mean,
they're absolutely vital, but they don't meet the
qualifications of the philosophy department or
the English department or whatever. The way
Harlan did it with Bob Tall was that Just before I
got to Texas, I don't know how much before, maybe
the same year I got there, Bob was denied tenure, a
promotion from assistant professor to associate
professor by the faculty, I assume based on
publication criteria. Weight of paper. Weight of
paper and a number of publications and science
done. Whereas he was clearly an unbelievable
talent, a world-class talent in
instrumentation. So Harlan told me later, And he
said this a number of different times in all the
time I knew him. So it's something that I know
happened, although I wasn't there to witness it.
But he said that after that decision was taken, he
told Bob Tull that as far as he, Harlan Smith, was
concerned, Bob Tull had tenure. And that Bob Tull
had a job at McDonald's as long as Harlan Smith had a
job at McDonald's. And indeed, he would let
himself go before he would let Bob Tull go. And
that's the way it happened. How important has Bob
been to astronomy at UT? Crucial. Absolutely
crucial. Because our history through the 70s and
80s was based on our excellence in Coudet
spectroscopy. And that excellence was built by a
number of different people. For example, David
Lambert, who is clearly one of the finest
observational astronomers in the world doing
two-day spectroscopy. But his success was built
on the foundation that Bob Tall built. And if Bob
Tall had not been there, McDonald wouldn't be
one-half, one-third what it is today in terms of
recognition throughout the astronomical
community. He was absolutely crucial.
Do you think that the... The last-minute decision
to strike out the 300-inch in the last hour of the
legislature, do you think that took a lot of steam
out of Harlan? Yeah, it did. During that period of
time, that's all Harlan did, was the 300-inch
telescope.
When the primary mirror money was lined out of the
state budget because of the oil crisis, it set us
back from a project that was on its way to probable
success. I won't say certainty, but probable
success to a project that was most likely not going
to happen. And Harlan didn't really recognize
that for a little while. He kept pushing it really
hard. And as late as the year when Bill Cunningham
became president, changing over from Pete Flon, I
forget what year that was. It was probably 86 or 87.
We had a breakfast meeting, Harlan and I and key
members of the Board of Visitors, with Bill
Cunningham right early on in his tenure as
president. And Harlan brought up the 300-inch
telescope. And Bill looked him straight in the eye
and said quite loudly to the whole table, he said,
Harlan, the 300-inch telescope is dead. Forget
it. And I think that was when it really became clear
to Harlan that it was over with. Did the torpedoing
of the 300-inch have any effect on the general
faculty and staff at McDonald's? I mean, were you
guys in a dump, sir? Yeah, I think there were
several years where we were kind of at a loss
because it was obvious that we needed more big
telescopes. It had been obvious for about 10 years
from 1978 that we needed big telescopes, another
big telescope, and yet we had no realistic
possibility of getting one in the near term. So
that there was a period of time where people were
very upset. We almost lost David Lambert to Ohio
State on the basis of the Columbus Project and
their involvement in Columbus. It was nip and
tuck, and he ended up staying. But I attribute the
fact that he was interested in leaving to this
climate that we were living in at that time. But
Colin did what... what he'd always done he
proceeded to move on many fronts at once and i and i
agreed with him at that time on this that we tried to
get involved with the sophia project using our
connections uh through paul harvey and through uh
hans mark we moved on inspector's gothic survey
telescope through our connection with dan
weedman at penn state and there were several other
Projects that were thought to be worthy of pursuit
that were explored and one by one they fell out.
They didn't happen We we didn't get involved
except for the SST spectroscopic survey
telescope and that one Is now going to come to pass?
One last question 107 inch at Westinghouse was a
fiasco as far as the mechanical operation of the
telescope. I well know that yeah Do you think that
has colored the attitude of the UT administration
towards the SST, Spectroscopic Survey
Telescope? Yes. The history of the UT
administration with respect to McDonnell
Observatory has been that we consistently, from
their view, we consistently either lie to them
about how much it's going to cost or are
incompetent to figure out how much it's going to
cost.